Once around
Denb. The star Denb is located at the
tail of the swan, Signis the Swan, in
the summertime in the northern
hemisphere. You can see it riding high
above your head. And it's a bright star.
It is the brightest star in that
constellation, but only the 19th
brightest of the stars we see in the
night sky. So, magnitude
1.2, fairly bright, and it just marks
out the tail there, and it the name Denb
comes from the Arabic word for
tail. Now, there's a bit of a difficulty
with denb, and that is that we don't
really know the distance.
The estimates have varied from 1,400 to
2,600 light years. At the larger end of
that range, it comes from stellar
modeling of the evolution of stars and
looking at the spectrum and from the
early Hippoc data. Hipparos was a
satellite sent up to use parallax to
measure the distance of the stars at
least for about a 100,000 fairly bright
or nearby stars.
But more recently, re-examination of
parallax measurements has come up with a
rather lower figure round about the 1400
mark. Now, all that uncertainty means
that we are uncertain about other
things. We can see how bright it appears
to us, but if it is a long way away, it
will seem fainter for the given power
output. And so we can't um really get a
handle on exactly how powerful it is.
Somewhere between 50,000 and 200,000
times the power output of our sun.
Likewise, although we can measure the
temperature of
8,700, pushing it just beyond the white
into the blue white color range, it's
difficult to estimate the mass. We know
that it's a super giant star. It's very
bright and at that sort of distance it
and it has to be somewhere between 15
and 20 solar masses and in terms of
radius between 100 and 200 times the
radius of our sun. So a definite giant
star and a very hot one. It marks out
one corner of the summer triangle. The
other two being Vega and Alter shown in
this diagram here are not a
constellation but an asterism just a
grouping of stars. Um I mean
constellations are made up groups of
stars but at least they're officially
recognized ones but this was made up by
uh Sir Patrick Moore in England and by
Ha Ray in the United States who came out
and uh popularized the idea of the
summer triangle. It's a really good way
of locating where you are in the sky and
being able to find your way around. And
since the summer triangle came to
prominence, people have invented the
winter triangle and the winter hexagon
and other arrangements, but the summer
triangle is by far the most
famous. Now, of course, the other way of
finding your way around the sky is to
use the pole star. And our north pole is
directly in line with the direction to a
star called Polaris. the pole star, the
so-called north star, because from
anywhere in the northern hemisphere, you
can always figure out where north is by
locating the pole star and then using it
to
navigate. But it has not always been
thus because the
earth as it uh precesses it changes the
direction in which the spin axis of the
earth points. And in fact that processes
rather like a
gyroscope around in a great big circle
taking well over 20,000 years to go
right round and it just so happens that
at the moment the axis is pointing
towards Polaris but in the past actually
it was nearer to Denb and it will be
again if we wait nearly 10,000 years and
in fact from Mars you would see Denb as
the North Star its uh polar axis is
pointing that
way. Now in terms of the physical
characteristics, one of the amazing
things with these hugely powerful blue
super giants is just how much material
they are throwing out into space. They
have immensely powerful solar winds and
the material are being ejected from Denb
is traveling away from it. A 100,000
times more
material than is being emitted by our
sun as our solar wind is being emitted
in the stellar winds of Danb. So it's
losing a terrific amount of material. Of
course, it's vast, so it doesn't make a
very large difference um unless you wait
a very long
time. It probably was formed in the
Signis giant molecular cloud and that's
pictured in this marvelous image here,
which contains a couple of million solar
masses of material and covers an area of
sky 4 by seven degrees. So it's a really
big and prominent uh feature in our
observations. And within the Signis
molecular cloud, you have the North
America Nebula. So shown at the top
left, that pink gas uh is glowing
hydrogen marking out the shape of the
North American
continent. You have the Pelican Nebula
shown at the bottom right. And you have
a whole number of OB associations in
particular the OB7 association that
seems to contain uh DNEB. And these are
groups of hot young powerful stars. Uh
these O and B type stars or the hottest
classes, the blue super giants. And they
often arise in these giant molecular
clouds out of uh the collapse of the
cloud of material forming clusters of
new stars in great numbers. These OB
associations. So Danb was born in one of
these associations around about 12
million years ago and that's very very
recently in astronomical terms.
It started off heavier than it is now
with about 23 times the sun's mass, but
it's been losing mass ferociously
because of those enormous stellar winds.
And it's now down to 19 or even less,
maybe even down to 15. Um, and we think
that at this age, these giant stars live
fast and die young. They burn through
their fuel very very rapidly because of
their high core temperatures. Um the
lifetime shrinks uh at an amazing rate
as the mass goes up even though they
have more fuel. And we think that all of
the hydrogen in the core of denb has now
been used up. But there's considerable
uncertainty about this as there is about
the
mass. When you look at the evolution of
massive stars, more massive than the
sun, they are able to not only fuse
hydrogen to helium along the main
sequence track, but they can go beyond
that and turn helium into carbon and
oxygen and other elements beyond. But
this goes in phases. And the efficiency
of the overall power output of a star
depends on whether it's using all of its
mass to carry out fusion or whether it
has an inert ball of uh material that
it's unable yet to consume in the
center. And so massive stars swell up to
become giants when they build a helium
core that uh they are unable to use. So
only a shell of hydrogen is carrying out
nuclear fusion and releasing energy
around that inert core. But gradually
the core will shrink and get hotter and
hotter as more and more helium is
created and dumped into it. And
eventually it gets to a mass and a
temperature where it's able to crush the
helium together and trigger off the
triple alpha process combining three
alpha particles, three helium nuclei to
make carbon and then adding a fourth one
to turn the carbon into oxygen. And so
you build quite rapidly a carbon oxygen
core. But that helium flash releasing a
lot of energy causes the star to get
much more power efficient for a while.
It's now using all of that previously
inert mass to generate energy. So a lot
more heat comes out and that raises the
overall temperature of this star again.
And so it will become more uh from the
the red giant phase over to the yellow
and even to the blue end of things. And
you can see that in this track diagram,
the Herzbrung Russell diagram of color
from blue at the left to cooler red at
the right. Stars start on the red line
on the main sequence and then they will
progress off it when the core helium
builds up too much. Their efficiency
drops and the shell burning of hydrogen
has to sustain them and they move over
and up a little kink to the tip of the
red giant branch. And there they will
sit for a while until the helium kicks
off. And when the helium kicks off, they
turn away from that point on the
diagram, migrate leftwards back through
the yellow and into the blue onto what's
called a blue
loop. But gradually, of course, they
build a carbon oxygen inert core. And
that can't be fused initially, so they
become uh less efficient. They've got a
dead core, and so they migrate back to
being red again. And so that loop
reverses. So they zip backwards and
forwards across this intervening region.
Um and they will do that for each stage
of nuclear fusion. So as the carbon
oxygen core builds up, eventually it
will ignite and start burning to create
things like neon,
magnesium, sulfur, silicon, and all the
way up to iron. And as each stage
ignites, it takes a little trip across
the Usprung rust little diagram and back
again. But eventually they will uh
exhaust all their options. They will
build an iron core and uh once that has
happened, they are doomed and they will
explode as a
supernova. Now we don't quite know where
Denb is in this process and I'll come
back to that.
So, we will find out perhaps when it
explodes because it will create one of a
number of types of
supernova. If it's on the smaller end of
the mass range, it should detonate as a
type 2p
supernova with a characteristic light
curve.
And there's a video about these uh
different types of uh classifications of
supernovi for you to enjoy as
well. But if it's more massive, then it
will first blow away all the remaining
hydrogen from its outer layers and
expose to
us a hotter inner layer of heliumrich
material. And when this happens, the
star will appear either as a yellow
hyper giant or if it's a bit more
massive, a luminous blue variable going
even towards the blue end, the hotter
end of the spectrum, or even a Wolf Ray
star where the uh power is mostly coming
out in the ultraviolet end of things at
very high temperatures indeed. And then
eventually after not a very long period
of time astronomically speaking those
guys will explode as well. But we will
see them as different. We'll see them as
what's called type 1b and type 1 C
supernovi with almost no hydrogen
visible in the spectrum of the
light. Now Denb is in fact a variable
star. It's magnitude varies over a small
range. It's uh just 8/10 8100ths of a
magnitude overall, but it does get
brighter and fainter. Um, and it's a
unique type of variable. And I mean
unique in the sense that there is only
one. This class of variables has been
called the alpha signi variables. Um,
and then is alpha signi and it's the
only member of it. And we don't really
understand quite how that is
occurring.
Now, when I look at all these different
stars in these once around videos, I
often look to see if we can uh show
whether or not these stars have
companions. But it's incredibly
difficult with these uh rather large
stars.
But back in the day, spectroscopic
studies showed that the light coming
from the star had the absorption lines
in it that went from single to double to
single to double and back, indicating
that there was perhaps a companion
orbiting around the star uh caused by
the shift in the Doppler um wavelength
of the light based on whether the star
was moving towards us or or away from
us. And the period for this was
variously estimated. One estimate was
850 days, but there were some shorter
ones. But we now think that maybe this
was false and that in fact the
variations of motion are the turbulence
in the um emitted atmosphere and all of
that stellar wind coming away from Denb
carrying material up and then cooling
and falling back creating these
pulsations of movement. Because if we
look at specific lines from the element
calcium, we can penetrate deeper into
what's going on inside the star and that
shows no radial velocity, no movement.
So it suggests that the core part of the
star is essentially stationary from our
point of view. So probably no stellar
companion. And likewise,
uh I have to say there are no known
planets either. planets would be even
harder to detect around such a large
star. And being as its um radius of its
orbit would stretch out to the Earth's
orbit, it may well have eaten any uh
careless planets that were in fairly
tight orbits. But that doesn't stop
people speculating. And um in the Star
Trek franchise uh there is a map with a
whole load of planets marked as orbiting
round Denb, but I'm afraid we've never
detected any at all. So thanks very much
for listening. I hope you've enjoyed
that trip around the brightest star in
Signis the Swan.